---
templateKey: news
type: news
title: Federal Fixation - A New Blog Post by David J. Toscano, Author of
  FIGHTING POLITICAL GRIDLOCK
image: toscano_author_photo.jpg
related_book:
  - "5776"
date: 2021-11-22
---
We are pleased to offer this original blog post by David J. Toscano, author of [FIGHTING POLITICAL GRIDLOCK: How States Shape Our Nation and Our Lives](https://upress.virginia.edu/title/5776) with a foreword by Senator Mark R. Warner. You can read an abbreviated version in the *Falls Church News-Press* [here.](https://www.fcnp.com/2021/11/19/so-what-just-happened-an-evaluation-of-this-months-election-results/) 

**FEDERAL FIXATION--FIVE REASONS TO FOCUS ON THE STATES** 

When I first took my seat in Virginia’s House of Delegates in 2006, the public paid little attention to what was happening in state government. The focus was on a federal system that appeared dysfunctional and mired in partisan gridlock. Today, little has changed.  Congress seems increasingly paralyzed and polarized. Yet, the public’s gaze remains fixed on Washington.  Meanwhile, major decisions affecting control of the nation and the quality of our lives are being made in each of the 50 states. Here are five issues that affect you more than you know:  

1. Redistricting.  Ever wonder why your state can elect a governor from one party, but the majority of your Congressional Delegation and state representatives are from another?  One reason is redistricting, a process mostly controlled by state legislators that occurs every ten years to respond to population changes occurring in the country.  In North Carolina, Wisconsin, and Michigan, for example, Democratic candidates recently captured governorships but remain in the minority in both their congressional and statehouse delegations. Virginia Democrats prevailed in 14 of 21 statewide elections between 2001 and 2018, and the state voted Democratic in every presidential election since 2008. But as late as 2019, Republicans held a 66-34 margin in the House of Delegates. Why?  Pure and simple, the GOP controlled redistricting, and passed plans to protect its majority.   Redistricting is again underway in every single state. Although several use nonpartisan commissions to drawn lines,  state legislators control the process in most,  attempt to “stack the deck” to ensure their reelection and favor the party in power.  Sophisticated computer technology now makes it even easier to accomplish this task with surgical precision. Since different district lines can determine whether a Republican or a Democrat is elected to Congress, redistricting allows state legislators to influence policies adopted at the federal level.  In Texas, Florida, and Georgia, massive GOP majorities in the state legislatures provide Republicans the chance to gain congressional seats simply by drawing new district lines. And while state legislatures controlled by Democrats are producing new maps giving their party an advantage, many more chambers remain controlled by the GOP. Some argue that this fact alone ensures that congressional control will shift to the Republicans in the 2022 midterms.   

2. Voting.  Most rules about voting are enacted at the state—not national—level. Each state maintains its own rules for who can vote, when they can vote, and how they can vote.  Some states have stringent laws requiring certain types of identification to be produced at the polls; others allow early voting and automatic registration.  These rules not only determine how many people participate in the election, but the character of the electorate itself. That is why states are now engaged in historic struggles over the rules.  The difference between winning and losing an election can depend on how many people are eligible and how easily they can vote.  During the pandemic, many states enacted temporary measures that made voting easier and increased participation.   Now, states are fighting about whether to make them permanent.  While states like California, Virginia, and New York embraced the new measures, and eight states and DC now provide every registered voter a ballot in the mail for every state election, others, mostly those under Republican control, rolled back the pandemic reforms. Following the success of mobile voting sites in Fulton County, Georgia, for example, Republican state legislators passed a law limiting their use. Florida and Texas both placed new restrictions on mail-in voting.   

New and more troubling developments have also emerged that threaten not only the nonpartisan conduct of elections, but their very legitimacy.   Enacted under the guise of “election integrity” and to combat alleged fraud that is virtually nonexistent in American elections, some state legislatures are reducing the power of state secretaries of state, attorneys general, and boards of elections in the conduct of elections. Arizona’s Secretary of State, Democrat Katie Hobbs, who had labeled the so-called forensic audit conducted in the state as a ridiculous sham, drew the wrath of Republican legislators, who then undermined her ability to oversee elections. In Georgia, Republican Secretary of State Brad Raffensberger had his statutory powers reduced after both refusing President Trump’s request that “he find” 11,000 votes to swing the state and proclaiming instead that the 2020 Georgia election results were free and fair. North Carolina and Kansas Republicans passed measures to prevent their Attorneys General from settling election lawsuits without legislative imprimatur. Democratic Governors in both states vetoed the measures, but the Kansas veto was overridden, and is now law. Partisan audits of the 2020 election have now been approved in five states, including Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, Michigan, Georgia, and Arizona. The audits have done little to identify actual fraud but have been effective in feeding the “stop and steal” narrative and potentially undermining public support for elections in the process.   

3. Education.  Wonder why some topics are taught in schools and others are not?  Why some schools are physically deteriorating?  Or why some children score better on tests than others?  The answers are found in the state policy.  Exploring the history of racial discrimination, paying teachers more than the national average, or reinvesting in the buildings within which learning occurs are uniquely state issues.  Less than 8 percent of K-12 school funding comes from the federal government; most is provided by the states. And while debates about Critical Race Theory (CRT) have become nationalized, decisions about curriculum are often made by state governments. And these choices affect our children’s performance much more than policymakers in D.C.  In addition, most direct higher education funding is provided by the states, a key element in the generation of future talent for America’s economy. =

4. The Pandemic.  If you want a good example of why states matter, look at their actions during the pandemic.  When asked about responses to the virus early in the crisis, former President Trump exclaimed, “I would leave it to the Governors.” State executives responded by using legal authority not available to the President to impose a wide array of mandates and policies designed to combat the virus.  For almost a year, these executive orders went generally unchallenged.   But as the pandemic became politicized, many legislatures became uneasy with this exercise of power and moved to end it.  Even as the virus surged in states like Michigan and Wisconsin, state legislatures felt compelled to terminate executive orders.  And the spread of the Delta variant further intensified debates over mask and vaccination mandates.  Despite low vaccination rates and soaring infections, many states, mostly in the south, fought mask and inoculation mandates. By early October, 9 of the 10 states with the lowest vaccination numbers had Republican governors and legislatures opposed to mandates. Combining this with populations that are poorer and a public health infrastructure that is underfunded generates infection, pain, and death.   Where you live clearly makes a difference. Vermont, for example, has the highest vaccination rates, reporting that over 70% of its population was fully vaccinated by early October; Alabama was among the lowest, with only 44 percent being fully vaccinated. In Mississippi, almost one-half of the population had not even received one dose by mid-October.  Finally, budgeting of federal pandemic money is often done by the states.  And those choices have major consequences.  The recent action by Virginia, for example, to invest federal monies in the state’s Unemployment Compensation Trust Fund will save small businesses thousands of dollars in taxes that they would otherwise pay to the state.  

5. Energy and the Environment.  Remember the water crisis in Flint, Michigan in 2013?  Or the near collapse of the Texas electric grid during a freak snowstorm in 2021?  Those problems were generated by state action. In Michigan, state law permits a city in fiscal crisis to be taken over by an emergency manager.  This happened to Flint, a city whose finances had collapsed after decades of job loss and deindustrialization.  To save money, the state-installed manager changed the source of drinking water for the city.  The results were catastrophic. Although the new water was highly corrosive, Flint officials failed to treat it, and lead began to leach out from aging pipes into thousands of homes. Citizens died, many contracted severe illnesses, and some residents still must boil water.  Seven years and $100 million later, the city still has a fiscal crisis – and the replacement of the water pipes is not yet complete.  In Texas, lawmakers decided to separate the state from the national power grid decades ago.  In addition, their  preoccupation with keeping utility rates low prevented reinvestment in their electricity infrastructure. When unprecedented low temperatures hit the state, the system could not handle the demand, causing massive blackouts and an almost total collapse. While power generation, transmission, and distribution are typically viewed as federal issues, states play key roles, both in regulating rates and determining the how renewables will be integrated into the system. There are now almost twenty states in which the legislature has set target dates for major reductions in CO2 emissions. \
 \
The list above is certainly not exhaustive. Policies on criminal justice, economic development, and the culture wars are largely decided by the states. So while citizens criticize the federal government for partisanship and gridlock, decisions being made right now in statehouses across the nation will not only influence electoral results in 2022, but more importantly, the direction of the Nation and the quality of our lives for the foreseeable future.  

**David J. Toscano** is an attorney and the former minority leader in the Virginia House of Delegates.  He is the author of *[Fighting Political Gridlock: How States Shape Our Nation and Our Lives.](https://upress.virginia.edu/title/5776)*